Documentation for metapackages dependencies (#446)
oamg/leapp: docs/source/dependencies.md

# How to deal with dependencies

RPM dependencies of Leapp packages can be grouped into two groups:

1. *inner dependencies* between Leapp-related packages
1. *outer dependencies* on packages not related to Leapp (e.g. python)

The first group is a standard RPM dependency management. But the

> *outer dependencies* are really tricky. When a Leapp-related package need such

Reviewer: When Leapp related package**s** need...it **have** to depend

> package need such dependency, it has to depend on special capability (below)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
package need such a dependency, it has to depend on a special capability (below)
```

> and required dependency has to be set in the special metapackage - that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the required dependency has to be set in a special metapackage which
```

> provides this capability. From this point, the metapackage installed together

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provides this capability. At this point, the metapackage installed together
```

> with leapp packages has name **leapp-deps**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with leapp packages is named **leapp-deps**.
```

The capability (in case of the leapp tool, leapp framework, and snactor) is

> called **leapp-framework-dependencies**. Anytime the *outer* dependencies are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
called **leapp-framework-dependencies**. Every time the *outer* dependencies are
```

> changed, the value of capability has to be incremented by one - so the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
changed, the value of the capability has to be incremented by one - so the
```

> information about the change is provided to other leapp related packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
information about the change is provided to other leapp-related packages.
```

> This metapackage can be simply replaced by different one, that will handle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This metapackage can be simply replaced by a metapackage that would handle
```

outer dependencies of the target system. That means, that the metapackage

> with dependencies for a target system is not part of this git repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with dependencies for the target system is not part of this git repository
```

> and it is completely on a leapp repository using the leapp tool (or framework)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the actors of the leapp-repository are responsible for providing
```

> to provide such package in case it is needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
such package in case it is needed.
```

## Why do I need to have a special way to define a dependency

One possible use of the Leapp framework is to do the in-place upgrade (IPU).

> In that case, it is expected Leapp needs to be executed in two different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In that case, it is necessary to execute Leapp on two different
```

versions of the system - it starts with the source system and then continues
with the target (upgraded) system. It is quite common that some packages are

> renamed between those two systems (or in case of leapp repository, you would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
renamed between those two systems (or in case of leapp-repository, you would
```

like to use technology on the new system that is not provided on the original
one).
In such cases, it is hard to satisfy dependencies on both systems - when you
want to proceed with the upgrade process with the same Leapp packages.

> As the solution we are using the metapackage that contains those dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a solution, we are using the metapackage that contains those dependencies.
```

## What to do when dependencies needs to be changed

It's easy to change *outer dependencies* for Leapp. Open the

> `packaging/leapp.spec` file and change the dependencies as needed under

Reviewer 2: Add a link to spec here.

> `packaging/leapp.spec` file and change dependencies as it is needed for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`packaging/leapp.spec` file and change the dependencies as needed under
```

`%package deps`. The right place is pretty highlighted (you cannot miss it):

```spec
##################################################
# Real requirements for the leapp HERE
##################################################
...
Requires: findutils
Requires: your-dependency
```

And do not forget to increment value of `leapp-framework-dependencies`:

```spec
# IMPORTANT: everytime the requirements are changed, increment number by one
# - same for Provides in deps subpackage
Requires: leapp-framework-dependencies = 1
```

**IMPORTANT** Do the same thing for all `Requires` and `Provides` of the
`leapp-framework-dependencies` capability in the SPEC file. Ensure that value
is consistent across the SPEC file.

### Some more unusual steps

> There is one official

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is an official
```

[Leapp repository](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository) that we manage

> and it is already affected by such change already. If you modify the

Reviewer: Please remove the last already...

> *outer dependencies*, inform guys about the change (e.g.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*outer dependencies*, inform the repository developers about the change (e.g.
```

[issue](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/issues/new))

> or better continue with instructions in the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or even better, continue by following instructions in the
```

# How to deal with dependencies

RPM dependencies of Leapp packages can be grouped into two groups:

1. *inner dependencies* between Leapp-related packages
1. *outer dependencies* on packages not related to Leapp (e.g. python)

The first group is pretty clear and you don't need to care about that so much

> anymore. But the *outer dependencies* are really tricky. This point, when

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
anymore. But the *outer dependencies* are really tricky. When
```

Author: Changed

one).
In such cases, it is hard to satisfy dependencies on both systems - when you
want to proceed with the upgrade process with the same Leapp packages.

As the solution we are using the metapackage that contains those dependencies.

## What to do when dependencies needs to be changed

It's easy to change *outer dependencies* for Leapp. Open the
`packaging/leapp.spec` file and change dependencies as it is needed for
`%package deps`. The right place is pretty highlighted (you cannot miss it):

```spec
##################################################
# Real requirements for the leapp HERE
##################################################
...
Requires: findutils
Requires: your-dependency
```

And do not forget to increment value of `leapp-framework-dependencies`:

```spec
# IMPORTANT: everytime the requirements are changed, increment number by one
# - same for Provides in deps subpackage
Requires: leapp-framework-dependencies = 1
```

**IMPORTANT** Do the same thing for all `Requires` and `Provides` of the
`leapp-framework-dependencies` capability in the SPEC file. Ensure that value
is consistent across the SPEC file.

### Some more unusual steps

> If you add *outer dependencies* in Leapp framework you must add this in

Reviewer 3: Not only when new dependency is added, but everytime dependencies are changed.

Author: Changed by your suggestion below

[Leapp repository](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository) metapackage too,
this is necessary to making sure Leapp will run on the target system in the
in-place upgrade.

> 

Reviewer 3: What about something like:
> There is one official [Leapp repository ](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository) that we manage and it is already affected by such change already. If you modify the *outer dependencies*, inform guys about the change (e.g. [issue](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/issues/new)) or better continue with intructions in the [doc](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/doc-rpm-deps/docs/dependencies.md) to reflect the change.

Author: Changed

For now, we have only RHEL 8 as target system, so you need to edit
[leapp-repository/packaging/leapp-el7toel8-deps.spec](https://github.com/oamg/leapp-repository/blob/master/packaging/leapp-el7toel8-deps.spec)
 and add your dependency, remember to change the value of
`leapp-framework-dependencies` to match with your framework value.

> 

Reviewer 3: I think that this information should be part of just leapp-repository repo. It is not neccessary here. We should mentioned that there it is one official leapp repository, which needs to reflect the changes (paragraph above) but that's all. Keep in mind that this framework can be used by anyone for whatever purposes. Another thing is, that we do not want to modify documentation everytime we will add something new into leapp repository. Keep it more "abstract". In case that people will look at the leapp-repository in case of change in leapp, it's pretty ok. Maybe link to the leapp repository documentation for handling of deps would be good idea as well.

Author: Removed
